ISO/IEC 15445
 () is the main  for displaying web pages and other information that can be displayed in a web browser.HTML is written in the form of  consisting of  enclosed in  (like ), within the web page content. HTML tags most commonly come in pairs like  and , although some tags, known as , are unpaired, for example . The first tag in a pair is the , the second tag is the  (they are also called  and ). In between these tags web designers can add text, tags, comments and other types of text-based content.The purpose of a  is to read HTML documents and compose them into visible or audible web pages. The browser does not display the HTML tags, but uses the tags to interpret the content of the page.HTML elements form the building blocks of all websites. HTML allows  to be embedded and can be used to create . It provides a means to create  by denoting structural  for text such as headings, paragraphs, lists, links, quotes and other items. It can embed  in languages such as  which affect the behavior of HTML webpages.Web browsers can also refer to  (CSS) to define the appearance and layout of text and other material. The , maintainer of both the HTML and the CSS standards, encourages the use of CSS over explicit presentational HTML markup.In 1980, physicist , who was a contractor at , proposed and prototyped , a system for  researchers to use and share documents. In 1989, Berners-Lee wrote a memo proposing an -based  system. Berners-Lee specified HTML and wrote the browser and server software in the last part of 1990. In that year, Berners-Lee and CERN data systems engineer  collaborated on a joint request for funding, but the project was not formally adopted by CERN. In his personal notes from 1990 he listed "some of the many areas in which hypertext is used" and put an encyclopedia first.The first publicly available description of HTML was a document called "HTML Tags", first mentioned on the Internet by Berners-Lee in late 1991. It describes 18 elements comprising the initial, relatively simple design of HTML. Except for the hyperlink tag, these were strongly influenced by SGMLguid, an in-house  based documentation format at CERN. Eleven of these elements still exist in HTML 4.HyperText Markup Language is a  that  use to interpret and  text, images and other material into visual or audible web pages. Default characteristics for every item of HTML markup are defined in the browser, and these characteristics can be altered or enhanced by the web page designer's additional use of . Many of the text elements are found in the 1988 ISO technical report TR 9537 , which in turn covers the features of early text formatting languages such as that used by the  developed in the early 1960s for the  (Compatible Time-Sharing System) operating system: these formatting commands were derived from the commands used by typesetters to manually format documents. However, the SGML concept of generalized markup is based on elements (nested annotated ranges with attributes) rather than merely print effects, with also the separation of structure and processing; HTML has been progressively moved in this direction with .Berners-Lee considered HTML to be an application of SGML. It was formally defined as such by the  (IETF) with the mid-1993 publication of the first proposal for an HTML specification:  by Berners-Lee and , which included an SGML  to define the grammar. The draft expired after six months, but was notable for its acknowledgement of the  browser's custom tag for embedding in-line images, reflecting the IETF's philosophy of basing standards on successful prototypes. Similarly, 's competing Internet-Draft, "HTML+ (Hypertext Markup Format)", from late 1993, suggested standardizing already-implemented features like tables and fill-out forms.After the HTML and HTML+ drafts expired in early 1994, the IETF created an HTML Working Group, which in 1995 completed "HTML 2.0", the first HTML specification intended to be treated as a standard against which future implementations should be based.Further development under the auspices of the IETF was stalled by competing interests. Since 1996, the HTML specifications have been maintained, with input from commercial software vendors, by the  (W3C). However, in 2000, HTML also became an international standard (/ 15445:2000). HTML 4.01 was published in late 1999, with further errata published through 2001. In 2004 development began on HTML5 in the  (WHATWG), which became a joint deliverable with the W3C in 2008.XHTML is a separate language that began as a reformulation of HTML 4.01 using  1.0. It continues to be developed:HTML markup consists of several key components, including  (and their ), character-based ,  and . Another important component is the , which triggers  rendering.The following is an example of the classic , a common test employed for comparing ,  and . This example is made using 9 :This Document Type Declaration is for HTML5. If the  declaration is not included, various browsers will revert to "" for rendering.HTML documents are composed entirely of  that, in their most general form have three components: a pair of , a "start tag" and "end tag"; some  within the start tag; and finally, any textual and graphical  between the start and end tags, perhaps including other nested elements. The  is everything between and including the start and end tags. Each  is enclosed in angle brackets.The general form of an  is therefore: . Some HTML elements are defined as  and take the form . Empty elements may enclose no content, for instance, the BR tag or the inline IMG tag. The name of an HTML element is the name used in the tags. Note that the end tag's name is preceded by a slash character, "/", and that in empty elements the end tag is neither required nor allowed. If attributes are not mentioned, default values are used in each case.Header of the HTML document:<head>...</head>. Usually the title should be included in the head, for example:Headings: HTML headings are defined with the  to  tags:Paragraphs:Line breaks:<br />. The difference between <br /> and <p> is that 'br' breaks a line without altering the semantic structure of the page, whereas 'p' sections the page into paragraphs. Note also that 'br' is an  in that, while it may have attributes, it can take no content and it may not have an end tag.Comments:Comments can help understanding of the markup and do not display in the webpage.There are several types of markup elements used in HTML.Most of the attributes of an element are , separated by "=" and written within the start tag of an element after the element's name. The value may be enclosed in single or double quotes, although values consisting of certain characters can be left unquoted in HTML (but not XHTML). Leaving attribute values unquoted is considered unsafe. In contrast with name-value pair attributes, there are some attributes that affect the element simply by their presence in the start tag of the element, like the  attribute for the  element.There are several common attributes that may appear in many elements:The abbreviation element, , can be used to demonstrate some of these attributes:This example displays as ; in most browsers, pointing the cursor at the abbreviation should display the title text "Hypertext Markup Language."Most elements also take the language-related attribute  to specify text direction, such as with "rtl" for right-to-left text in, for examples, ,  or .As of version 4.0, HTML defines a set of 252  and a set of 1,114,050 , both of which allow individual characters to be written via simple markup, rather than literally. A literal character and its markup counterpart are considered equivalent and are rendered identically.The ability to "escape" characters in this way allows for the characters  and  (when written as  and , respectively) to be interpreted as character data, rather than markup. For example, a literal  normally indicates the start of a tag, and  normally indicates the start of a character entity reference or numeric character reference; writing it as  or  or  allows  to be included in the content of an element or in the value of an attribute. The double-quote character (), when not used to quote an attribute value, must also be escaped as  or  or  when it appears within the attribute value itself. Equivalently, the single-quote character (), when not used to quote an attribute value, must also be escaped as  or  (not as  except in XHTML documents) when it appears within the attribute value itself. If document authors overlook the need to escape such characters, some browsers can be very forgiving and try to use context to guess their intent. The result is still invalid markup, which makes the document less accessible to other browsers and to other  that may try to parse the document for  purposes for example.Escaping also allows for characters that are not easily typed, or that are not available in the document's , to be represented within element and attribute content. For example, the acute-accented  (), a character typically found only on Western European keyboards, can be written in any HTML document as the entity reference  or as the numeric references  or , using characters that are available on all keyboards and are supported in all character encodings.  character encodings such as  are compatible with all modern browsers and allow direct access to almost all the characters of the world's writing systems.HTML defines several  for element content, such as script data and stylesheet data, and a plethora of types for attribute values, including IDs, names, URIs, numbers, units of length, languages, media descriptors, colors, character encodings, dates and times, and so on. All of these data types are specializations of character data.HTML documents are required to start with a  (informally, a "doctype"). In browsers, the doctype helps to define the rendering mode—particularly whether to use .The original purpose of the doctype was to enable parsing and validation of HTML documents by SGML tools based on the  (DTD). The DTD to which the DOCTYPE refers contains a machine-readable grammar specifying the permitted and prohibited content for a document conforming to such a DTD. Browsers, on the other hand, do not implement HTML as an application of SGML and by consequence do not read the DTD. does not define a DTD; therefore, in HTML5 the doctype declaration is simpler and shorter:An example of an HTML 4 doctype isThis declaration references the DTD for the 'strict' version of HTML 4.01. SGML-based validators read the DTD in order to properly parse the document and to perform validation. In modern browsers, a valid doctype activates standards mode as opposed to .In addition, HTML 4.01 provides Transitional and Frameset DTDs, .Semantic HTML is a way of writing HTML that emphasizes the meaning of the encoded information over its presentation (look). HTML has included semantic markup from its inception, but has also included presentational markup such as ,  and  tags. There are also the semantically neutral  tags. Since the late 1990s when  were beginning to work in most browsers, web authors have been encouraged to avoid the use of presentational HTML markup with a view to the .In a 2001 discussion of the , Tim Berners-Lee and others gave examples of ways in which intelligent software 'agents' may one day automatically trawl the Web and find, filter and correlate previously unrelated, published facts for the benefit of human users. Such agents are not commonplace even now, but some of the ideas of ,  and  may be coming close. The main difference between these web application hybrids and Berners-Lee's semantic agents lies in the fact that the current  and hybridisation of information is usually designed in by web developers, who already know the web locations and the  of the specific data they wish to mash, compare and combine.An important type of web agent that does trawl and read web pages automatically, without prior knowledge of what it might find, is the  or search-engine spider. These software agents are dependent on the semantic clarity of web pages they find as they use various techniques and  to read and index millions of web pages a day and provide web users with  without which the World Wide Web would be only a fraction of its current usefulness.In order for search-engine spiders to be able to rate the significance of pieces of text they find in HTML documents, and also for those creating mashups and other hybrids as well as for more automated agents as they are developed, the semantic structures that exist in HTML need to be widely and uniformly applied to bring out the meaning of published text.Presentational markup tags are  in current HTML and XHTML recommendations and are illegal in HTML5.Good semantic HTML also improves the  of web documents (see also ). For example, when a screen reader or audio browser can correctly ascertain the structure of a document, it will not waste the visually impaired user's time by reading out repeated or irrelevant information when it has been marked up correctly.HTML documents can be delivered by the same means as any other computer file. However, they are most often delivered either by  from a  or by .The  is composed primarily of HTML documents transmitted from web servers to web browsers using the  (HTTP). However, HTTP is used to serve images, sound, and other content, in addition to HTML. To allow the Web browser to know how to handle each document it receives, other information is transmitted along with the document. This  usually includes the  (e.g.  or ) and the character encoding (see ).In modern browsers, the MIME type that is sent with the HTML document may affect how the document is initially interpreted. A document sent with the XHTML MIME type is expected to be  XML; syntax errors may cause the browser to fail to render it. The same document sent with the HTML MIME type might be displayed successfully, since some browsers are more lenient with HTML.The W3C recommendations state that XHTML 1.0 documents that follow guidelines set forth in the recommendation's Appendix C may be labeled with either MIME Type. The current XHTML 1.1 Working Draft also states that XHTML 1.1 documents should be labeled with either MIME type.Most graphical email clients allow the use of a subset of HTML (often ill-defined) to provide formatting and  markup not available with . This may include typographic information like coloured headings, emphasized and quoted text, inline images and diagrams. Many such clients include both a  editor for composing HTML e-mail messages and a rendering engine for displaying them. Use of HTML in e-mail is controversial because of compatibility issues, because it can help disguise  attacks, because of accessability issues for blind or visually impaired people, because it can confuse  filters and because the message size is larger than plain text.The most common  for  containing HTML is . A common abbreviation of this is , which originated because some early operating systems and file systems, such as  and , limited file extensions to .An HTML Application (HTA; file extension ".hta") is a  application that uses HTML and Dynamic HTML in a browser to provide the application's graphical interface. A regular HTML file is confined to the  of the , communicating only to web servers and manipulating only webpage objects and . An HTA runs as a fully trusted application and therefore has more privileges, like creation/editing/removal of files and  entries. Because they operate outside the browser's security model, HTAs cannot be executed via HTTP, but must be downloaded (just like an ) and executed from local file system.HTML is precisely what we were trying to PREVENT— ever-breaking links, links going outward only, quotes you can't follow to their origins, no version management, no rights management.Since its inception, HTML and its associated protocols gained acceptance relatively quickly. However, no clear standards existed in the early years of the language. Though its creators originally conceived of HTML as a semantic language devoid of presentation details, practical uses pushed many presentational elements and attributes into the language, driven largely by the various browser vendors. The latest standards surrounding HTML reflect efforts to overcome the sometimes chaotic development of the language and to create a rational foundation for building both meaningful and well-presented documents. To return HTML to its role as a semantic language, the  has developed style languages such as  and  to shoulder the burden of presentation. In conjunction, the HTML specification has slowly reined in the presentational elements.There are two axes differentiating various variations of HTML as currently specified: SGML-based HTML versus XML-based HTML (referred to as XHTML) on one axis, and strict versus transitional (loose) versus frameset on the other axis.One difference in the latest HTML specifications lies in the distinction between the SGML-based specification and the XML-based specification. The XML-based specification is usually called  to distinguish it clearly from the more traditional definition. However, the root element name continues to be 'html' even in the XHTML-specified HTML. The W3C intended XHTML 1.0 to be identical to HTML 4.01 except where limitations of XML over the more complex SGML require workarounds. Because XHTML and HTML are closely related, they are sometimes documented in parallel. In such circumstances, some authors  as (X)HTML or X(HTML).Like HTML 4.01, XHTML 1.0 has three sub-specifications: strict, transitional and frameset.Aside from the different opening declarations for a document, the differences between an HTML 4.01 and XHTML 1.0 document—in each of the corresponding DTDs—are largely syntactic. The underlying syntax of HTML allows many shortcuts that XHTML does not, such as elements with optional opening or closing tags, and even EMPTY elements which must not have an end tag. By contrast, XHTML requires all elements to have an opening tag and a closing tag. XHTML, however, also introduces a new shortcut: an XHTML tag may be opened and closed within the same tag, by including a slash before the end of the tag like this: . The introduction of this shorthand, which is not used in the SGML declaration for HTML 4.01, may confuse earlier software unfamiliar with this new convention. A fix for this is to include a space before closing the tag, as such: .To understand the subtle differences between HTML and XHTML, consider the transformation of a valid and well-formed XHTML 1.0 document that adheres to Appendix C (see below) into a valid HTML 4.01 document. To make this translation requires the following steps:Those are the main changes necessary to translate a document from XHTML 1.0 to HTML 4.01. To translate from HTML to XHTML would also require the addition of any omitted opening or closing tags. Whether coding in HTML or XHTML it may just be best to always include the optional tags within an HTML document rather than remembering which tags can be omitted.A well-formed XHTML document adheres to all the syntax requirements of XML. A valid document adheres to the content specification for XHTML, which describes the document structure.The W3C recommends several conventions to ensure an easy migration between HTML and XHTML (see ). The following steps can be applied to XHTML 1.0 documents only:By carefully following the W3C's compatibility guidelines, a user agent should be able to interpret the document equally as HTML or XHTML. For documents that are XHTML 1.0 and have been made compatible in this way, the W3C permits them to be served either as HTML (with a  ), or as XHTML (with an  or  MIME type). When delivered as XHTML, browsers should use an XML parser, which adheres strictly to the XML specifications for parsing the document's contents.HTML 4 defined three different versions of the language: Strict, Transitional (once called Loose) and Frameset. The Strict version is intended for new documents and is considered best practice, while the Transitional and Frameset versions were developed to make it easier to transition documents that conformed to older HTML specification or didn't conform to any specification to a version of HTML 4. The Transitional and Frameset versions allow for , which is omitted in the Strict version. Instead,  are encouraged to improve the presentation of HTML documents. Because XHTML 1 only defines an XML syntax for the language defined by HTML 4, the same differences apply to XHTML 1 as well.The Transitional version allows the following parts of the vocabulary, which are not included in the Strict version:The Frameset version includes everything in the Transitional version, as well as the  element (used instead of ) and the  element.In addition to the above transitional differences, the frameset specifications (whether XHTML 1.0 or HTML 4.01) specifies a different content model, with  replacing , that contains either  elements, or optionally  with a .As this list demonstrates, the loose versions of the specification are maintained for legacy support. However, contrary to popular misconceptions, the move to XHTML does not imply a removal of this legacy support. Rather the X in XML stands for extensible and the W3C is modularizing the entire specification and opening it up to independent extensions. The primary achievement in the move from XHTML 1.0 to XHTML 1.1 is the modularization of the entire specification. The strict version of HTML is deployed in XHTML 1.1 through a set of modular extensions to the base XHTML 1.1 specification. Likewise, someone looking for the loose (transitional) or frameset specifications will find similar extended XHTML 1.1 support (much of it is contained in the legacy or frame modules). The modularization also allows for separate features to develop on their own timetable. So for example, XHTML 1.1 will allow quicker migration to emerging XML standards such as  (a presentational and semantic math language based on XML) and —a new highly advanced web-form technology to replace the existing HTML forms.In summary, the HTML 4.01 specification primarily reined in all the various HTML implementations into a single clearly written specification based on SGML. XHTML 1.0, ported this specification, as is, to the new XML defined specification. Next, XHTML 1.1 takes advantage of the extensible nature of XML and modularizes the whole specification. XHTML 2.0 will be the first step in adding new features to the specification in a standards-body-based approach.HTML lacks some of the features found in earlier hypertext systems, such as , ,  and others. Even some hypertext features that were in early versions of HTML have been ignored by most popular web browsers until recently, such as the link element and in-browser Web page editing.Sometimes Web services or browser manufacturers remedy these shortcomings. For instance,  and  allow surfers to edit the Web pages they visit.There are some  editors (What You See Is What You Get), in which the user lays out everything as it is to appear in the HTML document using a  (GUI), where the editor renders this as an HTML document, no longer requiring the author to have extensive knowledge of HTML.The WYSIWYG editing model has been criticized, primarily because of the low quality of the generated code; there are voices advocating a change to the  model (What You See Is What You Mean).WYSIWYG editors remains a controversial topic because of their perceived flaws such as: